blog: LaTeX output feature (#508)
posit-dev/great-tables: docs/blog/latex-output-tables/index.qmd

---
title: Great Tables and LaTeX Output
html-table-processing: none
author: Rich Iannone
date: 2024-11-15
jupyter: python3
format:
  html:
    code-fold: true
    code-summary: "Show the Code"
---

We've been doing quite a bit of work on getting **Great Tables** to produce LaTeX output tables. For those publishing workflows involving LaTeX documents, it's useful to have a reproducible solution for generating data tables as native LaTeX tables.

> In this post, we will provide examples of generating LaTeX outputs of tables using the `as_latex()` method, which is new in Great Tables `v0.14.0`. We'll go over some LaTeX workflows in Quarto and the current options for Great Tables within that publishing system. Then, we will address some of the caveats and current limitations for exporting tables to LaTeX while providing an outlook on how those will be addressed in the future.

Author: Now done.

> ## Generating a LaTeX table with Great Tables

Author: Now changed.

> When making a LaTeX output table with Great Tables, the code shouldn't be that much different from a table meant for HTML output. While HTML tables are rendered automatically in notebooks (as GT objects come with an HTML representation), getting the table as LaTeX requires the use of the new `as_latex()` method. Here is an example where a basic table is generated, and the LaTeX table code is returned and printed.

Reviewer: from pairing

```suggestion
Use the `GT.as_latex()` method to generate LaTeX table code. This code includes important structural pieces like titles, spanners, and value formatting.

For example, here's a simple table output as LaTeX code:
```

```{python}
from great_tables import GT
from great_tables.data import gtcars
import polars as pl

gtcars_pl = (
    pl.from_pandas(gtcars)
    .select(["mfr", "model", "hp", "trq", "mpg_c", "msrp"])
)

gt_tbl = (
    GT(
        gtcars[["mfr", "model", "hp", "trq", "msrp"]].head(5),
    )
    .tab_header(
        title="Some Cars from the gtcars Dataset",
        subtitle="Five Cars are shown here"
    )
    .tab_spanner(
        label="Make and Model",
        columns=["mfr", "model"],
        id="make_model"
    )
    .tab_spanner(
        label="Performance",
        columns=["hp", "trq", "msrp"]
    )
    .tab_spanner(
        label="Everything but the cost",
        columns=["mfr", "model", "hp", "trq"]
    )
    .fmt_integer(columns=["hp", "trq"])
    .fmt_currency(columns="msrp")
    .tab_source_note("Cars are all 2015 models.")
    .tab_source_note("Horsepower and Torque values are estimates.")
)

> print(gt_tbl.as_latex())

Author: Done.

```

The table example shows how some of Great Tables' structural components are represented in LaTeX. We can add a title to the table with `tab_header()` and it will be placed in a caption (where the title and subtitle will be sized appropriately). Spanners, which are something of a pain to manually author, work well here, and we can use an unlimited number of spanner levels. Number formatting is handled correctly here with `fmt_integer()` and `fmt_currency()` (notice that `$` is escaped as `\$`). Finally, source notes are placed below the table in a minipage environment.

> A frequent bugbear with any programmatic generation of LaTeX tables is LaTeX escaping. Not escaping correctly often leads to LaTeX rendering errors and this can break an entire publishing workflow. Thankfully, Great Tables will automatically and correctly escape characters in LaTeX and this will happen with:

Reviewer: I think we could cut some of this down (e.g. to say in a short sentence or two that Great Tables escapes where necessary, etc..)

Author: The escaping paragraph is now much shorter.

- any text in the input table (e.g., cell values containing square brackets)
- any *new* text added to the table (e.g., titles, source notes, new column labels, etc.)
- any formatting performed via the `fmt_*()` methods

We wanted to get off to a good start on this and a big chunk of the work involves LaTeX output that is well-tested and consistently error-free when processed by a LaTeX engine.

## Using LaTeX output from Great Tables in Quarto

> Aside from printing out the LaTeX table code, there is support for using Great Tables in Quarto when the output type is `"pdf"`. To make the gtcars example work in that environment, three things need to be done:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Producing LaTeX table code is especially handy when using Quarto to generate PDF documents.

For example, the quarto document below generates a PDF from Great Tables.
```

And then punt the bulleted list to after the qmd

from great_tables.data import gtcars
import polars as pl

gtcars_pl = (
    pl.from_pandas(gtcars)
    .select(["mfr", "model", "hp", "trq", "mpg_c", "msrp"])
)

gt_tbl = (
    GT(
        gtcars[["mfr", "model", "hp", "trq", "msrp"]].head(5),
    )
    .tab_header(
        title="Some Cars from the gtcars Dataset",
        subtitle="Five Cars are shown here"
    )
    .tab_spanner(
        label="Make and Model",
        columns=["mfr", "model"],
        id="make_model"
    )
    .tab_spanner(
        label="Performance",
        columns=["hp", "trq"]
    )
    .tab_spanner(
        label="Everything but the cost",
        columns=["mfr", "model", "hp", "trq"]
    )
    .fmt_integer(columns=["hp", "trq"])
    .fmt_currency(columns="msrp")
    .tab_source_note("Cars are all 2015 models.")
    .tab_source_note("Horsepower and Torque values are estimates.")
    .tab_options(table_width="600pt")
)

print(gt_tbl.as_latex())
```
````
</details>

## Current limitations of LaTeX table output

The `as_latex()` method is still experimental and has some limitations. The following functionality that is supported in HTML output tables is not currently supported in LaTeX output tables:

> 

Author: I made a table with two columns and it looks pretty nice!

- the `fmt_markdown()`, `fmt_units()`, `fmt_image()`, and `fmt_nanoplot()` methods
- the `sub_missing()` and `sub_zero()` methods
- most options in the `tab_options()` method, particularly those that are specific to styling text, borders, or adding fill colors to cells

Some of these limitations are short-term, notably the ones dealing with the use of the table stub and row groups. We plan to address this soon but having those structural components in a table now will raise an error when using `.as_latex()`.

Currently, we don't see a solution for Markdown-to-LaTeX conversion. We depend on the `commonmark` library to perform Markdown-to-HTML transformation but the library doesn't support LaTeX output.

Styling a LaTeX table is currently not possible. Having a `tab_style()` statement in your GT code and subsequently using `.as_latex()` won't raise an error, but it will warn and essentially no-op. Many of the options available in `tab_options()` are those that perform styling

As development continues, we will work to expand the capabilities of the `as_latex()` method to reduce these limitations and more clearly document what is and is not supported.

> ## Capabilities of Quarto with HTML tables in LaTeX and Typst output

Author: Now removed.
